---
label: 10
title: Famous and Infamous Prisoners
subtitle:
weight: 100
type: essay
class: page-one
abstract:
---
The experience of prison varied from person to person depending on his or her background, but unless the prisoners were educated and literate, their stories were unlikely to survive, so although hawkers and beggars were representative of countless others who passed through Victoria Gaol, they were the silent majority. For prisoner narratives we must look to the memoirs of a number of political dissidents and journalists who happened to do time in Hong Kong. Glimpses of individual prisoners who stood out from the masses can also be construed from between the lines of newspaper reports recording the sojourn of people under deportation orders, or drawn from testimonies given at some of the more sensational trials.

**W.H. Adsetts**

‘One of the most cold-blooded ever committed in Hong Kong by a white man’ was how Detective Sergeant Ed O’Sullivan described the murder dubbed ‘The Trunk Tragedy’ by the *China Mail* in its reports in August and September 1907.[^1] The murder was committed by William Hall Adsetts, variously described as an American Marine and a plumber and tinsmith, and his victim was a Miss Gertrude Dayton, a prostitute—a member, the Crown Solicitor observed, of the ‘unfortunate class’ in Manila.[^2]

Unfolding over a month during preliminary hearings in the Magistracy and the full trial in the Supreme Court, the stories that emerged from a multitude of witnesses transfixed the public in Manila, Chefoo (Yantai), Shanghai and Hong Kong. At the beginning of the trial, there was such a rush for seats by sensation-hunters and the merely curious that all Chinese at the back of the court had to be turned out to make room for Europeans and foreigners. Victoria Gaol, where the accused was held during the period from his being remanded to the custody of the police until his execution, basked in the reflected notoriety of this case.

On Saturday 3 August a man and a woman travelling under the name of ‘Mr and Mrs W.H. Jones’ arrived from Manila and checked into the Hongkong Hotel. Among their luggage was a large Saratoga trunk measuring roughly 2 feet 6 inches long, 20 inches wide and about 2 feet deep. They were a handsome couple: he was in his late 20s, of above average height, with light brown hair and blue eyes, and several of his teeth were ‘stopped in gold’,74 a feature that later helped various witnesses to identify him; she was a statuesque blonde, about 5 feet 8 inches tall, with rather angular arms and long white pointed fingers, on which sparkled a number of rings. It later transpired that the woman, having skipped Manila in a hurry with some insurance money that belonged to another, had brought all her jewellery with her.

After dining together, Adsetts and Dayton proceeded to spend the evening with Dayton’s old friends in two ‘gay houses’[^3] at 52 Hollywood Road and 18 Hollywood Road, where they drank a great deal of champagne and wine. They left the second brothel between two and three o’clock in the morning. Nobody at the hotel saw them return. Adsetts later maintained that he had been separated from Dayton, and though too drunk to remember much he did recall spending the rest of the night with another prostitute in an unknown Japanese brothel in Ship Street in Wan Chai. He returned to the Hongkong Hotel early the next morning to discover that Dayton was not sleeping off her night of heavy drinking but dead. He claimed that his actions afterwards were prompted by panic. Events then took on a surreal quality.

Adsetts came out of his room at around eight o’clock and ordered two coolies to move his Saratoga trunk downstairs. In the hotel lobby he engaged another two coolies to help him carry the trunk to the office of Butterfield and Swire. He told the shipping clerk there that he wanted to consign the trunk to a Mr A.H. Jacques in Hoihow (Haikou) in China. No address was given for Jacques, but Adsetts said Jacques would call for it when the trunk reached its destination. Later, Adsetts returned to the shipping office and removed the trunk. He engaged two more coolies to take him and the trunk to Murray Pier, where he found a sampan woman, who understood a little English, to ply him and the trunk across the water to a steamship, the Monteagle, then lying in Causeway Bay. She recounted the transaction in court: ‘I wanchee sampan one hour,’ the ‘European’ had said to her. ‘I talkee him eighty cents. He talkee my all right two dollar!’[^4]

On board the Monteagle Adsetts persuaded its quartermaster to take the trunk into the ship’s baggage room, promising to return later. And there the trunk lay until the 7th, when a stench that was beginning to permeate the ship was traced to its source. Forced open, the trunk was found to contain the decomposed body of an adult female, apparently strangled. The body was lying on its side and jammed into the trunk; the knees were doubled up under the chin, and the head was more or less concealed by the arms. Around her neck was a waist band from her dress, twisted tightly with a hairbrush that had obviously served as a tourniquet. Two towels marked ‘Hongkong Hotel’ were found in the trunk—a vital clue that helped the police trace the murder to Adsetts.

A witness from one of the brothels in Hollywood Road later identified the dead woman as Gertrude Dayton by the gold crowns on her teeth, the contours of her arms and her long pointed fingers. By then Adsetts, after pawning two diamonds at a shop in Queen’s Road, had left town for Shanghai (the pawnbroker recognised him by his gold teeth in an identification parade later held in Victoria Gaol). Then, keeping one step ahead of the police, he slipped away to Chefoo in northern China. He had all Dayton’s jewellery with him, and she had a considerable amount, not to mention fourteen post office orders of $100 gold each. From Chefoo he escaped to Manila, and it was there that the law—in the shape of Detective Sergeant Ed O’Sullivan and Detective Perkins of the police force in Hong Kong—finally caught up with him. Extradited from Manila to stand trial in Hong Kong, Adsetts was found guilty and sentenced to death. He was hanged on 13 November 1907.


**Ai Wu**

In the early 20th century Hong Kong was the transhipment point for overseas Chinese deported to China from British, French and Dutch colonies in Asia and from places as far afield as Britain, Mauritius and the United States. Among them
were vagrants, superannuated labourers, and banished political dissidents. The Hong Kong Police handled these deportees, along with the thousands deported from within Hong Kong. Many spent a night or two in Victoria Gaol.

In 1931 more than 80 political deportees from Rangoon were transferred through Hong Kong. One of them was the Chinese writer, Ai Wu (1904–1992). Born Tang Daogeng in Sichuan, he left home in 1925 and led the life of a drifter for several years, taking odd jobs to fund his travels. He walked from Chengdu to Kunming, and crossed from Yunnan into British Burma, where he eventually found work as assistant editor on a newspaper. He had mingled with people living on the edge of destitution during his life on the road. Now, galvanised by what he described as the ‘English imperialists’ shady schemes of deception and oppression’ over the poor and weak, he voiced his support of a Burmese peasants’ revolt.
For this he was packed off on a ship for deportation back to China via Hong Kong.

He had long wanted to see Hong Kong, in his mind’s eye a glittering city he likened to an ingénue garlanded with pearls and jade. As his ship sailed into the harbour in the winter of 1931, the sight of a mountain ablaze with lights seemed to promise all he had dreamed. Instead he and other deportees were taken to the police station and clapped into Victoria Gaol—the process was as simple, he noted, as driving swine into a pigsty. He wrote a graphic account of his one night in this ‘free government hotel’ two years later:

>huddled in a cell measuring not much more than 12 square metres. They woke,
startled, their eyes peering at us from faces bloated with dropsy . . . A tinplate
chamber pot stood in one corner; it had obviously overflowed, because the floor
around it was awash with urine. A couple of banana-shaped lumps of shit lay
nearby. The whole cell was pervaded by the acrid stench of disinfectant and ordure—the degradation of it struck us as something from another world . . . On the other side of the grating, like some flickering shadow of a ghost, a black-coated Indian guard, rifle on shoulder, paced to and fro. The scene was the stuff of anger, and our rage exploded in a torrent of abuse: ‘Foreign devils! Damn you! Red-haired barbarians!’ Conditions in the Burmese detention centre were so much better than this place: a meal on arrival, a blanket at bedtime, a spacious cell, enough air to breathe, and even a Western-style flush lavatory . . . Here in Hong Kong, who cares if you are hungry or cold or asphyxiated by the stink of the chamber pot? We couldn’t help screaming: ‘Red-haired barbarians! You treat us worse than slaves!’ Later we fell into conversation with the other six prisoners. None of them had done anything wrong except lose their jobs in Singapore, their place of sojourn. How outrageous! Is it a crime to be unemployed? . . . If they are to be deported, by all means send them back, but why should they have to suffer even a moment in this pigsty? Are the laws of this so-called civilised country so unjust?
These labourers’ blood and sweat built the prosperity of Malaya and the Straits Settlements for those ungrateful imperialist pigs and dogs to enjoy. Then they are bundled off into banishment . . .89
It is said that the measure of a civilisation is its prisons and how prisoners are treated. Ai Wu implicitly concurred, portraying the grim reality of Victoria Gaol as a mirror image of the racism and brutalities of imperialism. His account remains a rare first-hand testimony in Chinese of being inside Victoria Gaol. The next day on a ship bound for Amoy, he confessed to a sense of sadness tinged with anger. ‘My deepest impression of Hong Kong,’ he observed, ‘is the viciousness of imperialism and the filth and stink of the chamber pot!’

#### Notes
[^1]:*China Mail*, 23 September 1907.
[^2]:*Hongkong Daily Press*, 2 October 1907.
[^3]:*Hongkong Telegraph*, 23 October 1907.
[^4]:*Hongkong Telegraph*, 7 October 1907.
