---
label: 6
title: The Magistrates
subtitle:
weight: 60
type: essay
class: page-one
abstract:
---

By the mid-19th century, stipendiary magistrates in England were required to have at least seven years’ experience as barristers. With a few exceptions, Hong Kong’s early magistrates were not similarly qualified. At the time, a magistrate’s salary—usually £800 per annum—was insufficient to attract competent barristers from England to serve in such a remote, expensive and unhealthy colony. Later, from the 1870s to the eve of World War II, the Magistracy became a routine posting for cadet officers.

Recruited since the 1860s from among British university graduates, cadet officers trained in the Chinese language formed the administrative class of the government, filling senior positions. Cadet-magistrates had the advantage of being able to understand the Cantonese spoken by the great majority of defendants and witnesses. Even so, proceedings were usually conducted through interpreters. From 1891, following practices in Singapore and Ceylon, cadets had priority for the position of magistrate, after passing a rudimentary law examination. Most cadets served as magistrates only for a year or two before moving to higher positions. Others, having acquired legal qualifications, became judges, even in a few cases chief justices.

At various times in the 19th century the senior magistrate sat on the Legislative Council or the Executive Council, Hong Kong’s two highest councils of government. With one brief exception—the London-trained barrister Ng Choy, who served for about 12 months in 1880–1881—all of Hong Kong’s magistrates before World War II were Europeans, and all were men: the first female Magistrate, Betty Searle (who served briefly at the Central Magistracy), was not appointed until 1956. The first Magistrate, William Caine, had little formal education of any kind. On the Chinese island of Chusan, taken by the British during the First Opium War, he served from time to time as Judge-Advocate, with responsibilities for maintaining discipline among the troops, camp-followers, and the occupied population. As both Magistrate and chief of police (1841–1846) in Hong Kong, he maintained law and order during the chaotic, crime-ridden first few years of the colony.




**Ng Choy**

An interpreter of a very different calibre—Ng Choy—became the only Chinese Magistrate to serve in Hong Kong before World War II. Ng Choy (usually known outside Hong Kong as Wu Tingfang) most fully met the qualities required for the position: legal expertise, fluency in Chinese, and a knowledge of Hong Kong and its people. Born in Singapore, Ng attended missionary school in Canton and St Paul’s College in Hong Kong. After working as a translator and journalist, he became a clerk and interpreter in the Magistracy and other courts in the 1860s, and then studied law at Lincoln’s Inn in London. He was called to the Bar in 1877, and returned to Hong Kong in 1878, where he practised as the colony’s first Chinese barrister and was later appointed its first Chinese Justice of the Peace. Chinese leaders in Hong Kong adopted him as their spokesman. Europeans treated him almost as an equal. He was one of the few Chinese to be served first-class tiffin with European passengers on the Hong Kong–Canton steamer. There was, said Chief Justice Smale, ‘not a more honourable and straightforward man in Hong Kong’.[^1] The egalitarian Governor, Sir John Pope Hennessy, seized on Ng as a confidant and adviser on Chinese affairs. In May 1880 Hennessy appointed him both as provisional member of the Legislative Council and acting Police Magistrate, giving him permission to continue his private practice as a barrister while Magistrate—an unusual concession. Ng Choy acted as Magistrate in Hong Kong for only 12 months.

At a time when controversy was raging in British India over proposals to give Indian judges jurisdiction over Europeans, Ng’s appointment prompted a question from a Member of Parliament about whether it was really the case that a ‘native’ Magistrate in Hong Kong had jurisdiction to try European criminals.[^2] The colonial press criticised Ng for leniency in a few cases. However, his sentences did not differ much from those imposed by his various fellow Magistrates (the former policeman Charles Vandeleur Creagh, the barrister J.J. Francis, and the Gaol Superintendent Malcolm Stuart Tonnochy—the turnover was considerable at this time). Between them they dealt with larcenies, assaults, kidnappings, gambling offences, invasions of the Opium Monopoly, and the usual run of street nuisances, punishing offenders with small fines, imprisonment and the stocks: with the reforms by Governor Hennessy, flogging was not available to magistrates at this time, a fact that Ng regretted in at least one case of indecent assault.

Ng also sentenced a number of Europeans to fines or imprisonment—usually for being drunk and disorderly or rogues and vagabonds. Ng’s most serious case involving a European defendant was a charge of attempted rape made in April 1881 by a 16-year-old Chinese girl against Thomas Ide Bowler, a 30-year-old Englishman and a frequent visitor to the Magistracy, whether as complainant or defendant. Ng had to decide whether to commit Bowler for trial in the Supreme Court. The girl had agreed, through a procuress, to sell her services to Bowler and was taken to his house. But on discovering he was a foreigner she had refused to go through with it. Allegedly, Bowler had then attempted to rape her. Finding that the medical evidence obtained by the Colonial Surgeon did not support the allegations of rape and assault made by the girl, the prosecuting policeman, Inspector Cradock, withdrew the case and Bowler was discharged.[^3]

Ng’s position near to the apex of both the colonial and Chinese worlds was precarious and short-lived. For many European colonists he was too closely associated with the unpopular Governor Hennessy, the ‘stormy petrel’ of Britain’s late-Victorian Empire, who left a trail of controversy and scandal in the colonies of which he had been Governor. The Colonial Office transferred him to Hong Kong in 1877 in the hope there would be few opportunities for mischief in this well-run and prosperous place. They were mistaken. The colonial elite resented his solicitous attention to the views of Chinese merchants—his ‘chinomania’ as some called it—which, they believed, was undermining the established order; already British business was losing ground to the rising and self-confident Chinese merchant elite. They blamed increased crime on his attempts to introduce modern penal policies, giving weight to imprisonment over flogging.

Hennessy abruptly left Hong Kong in May 1882 after a long-running scandal in which he was alleged to have attacked the leading English barrister with an umbrella.[^4] The Chinese leaders quickly dropped Ng, who left Hong Kong later in 1882 for Tianjin, after having speculated disastrously during a property bubble fuelled by Hennessy’s policies. Ng went on to enjoy a distinguished career as a diplomat, politician and reformer in China. As one of the commissioners for new legal codes under the late Qing, he urged unsuccessfully for the introduction of jury trials and the English system of justice. In Hong Kong, he said in a memorial to the Chinese Emperor, ‘all trials were conducted according to English law which rely strictly on evidence, without resorting to extracting confessions by torture. Yet cases were disposed of with despatch as they came before the courts, and never accumulated.’

#### Notes
[^1]:Hennessy to Hicks Beach, 19 January 1880, CO 129/187, 47.
[^2]:Kimberley to Hennessy, 11 August 1880; Hennessy to Kimberley, 17 September 1880 (with enclosures), CO 129/191, 11-14, & CO 129/189, 460-70.
[^3]:*China Mail*, 22 April 1881.
[^4]:Pope-Hennessy, *Verandah*, 213-28.
